The University of Queensland (UQ) is a public research university located primarily in Brisbane, the capital city of the Australian state of Queensland. Founded in 1909 by the state parliament, UQ is one of the six sandstone universities, an informal designation of the oldest university in each state. The University of Queensland is ranked second nationally by Excellence in Research for Australia and equal second in Australia based on the average of four major global university league tables. The University of Queensland is a founding member of edX, Australia's research-intensive Group of Eight, the international research network McDonnell International Scholars Academy, and the global Universitas 21 network.

The main St Lucia campus occupies much of the riverside inner suburb of St Lucia, southwest of the Brisbane central business district. Other UQ campuses and facilities are located throughout Queensland, the largest of which are the Gatton campus and the Mayne Medical School. UQ's overseas establishments include UQ North America office in Washington D.C., and the UQ-Ochsner Clinical School in Louisiana, United States.

The university offers associate, bachelor, master, doctoral, and higher doctorate degrees through a college, a graduate school, and six faculties. UQ incorporates over one hundred research institutes and centres, such as the Institute for Molecular Bioscience, Boeing Research and Technology Australia Centre, the Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, and the UQ Dow Centre for Sustainable Engineering Innovation. Recent research achievements of the university include pioneering the invention of the HPV vaccine that prevents cervical cancer, developing a COVID-19 vaccine currently in human trials and the development of high-performance superconducting MRI magnets for portable scanning of human limbs.

UQ counts two Nobel laureates (Peter C. Doherty and John Harsanyi), over a hundred Olympians winning numerous gold medals and 117 Rhodes Scholars among its alumni and staff. UQ's alumni also include the President of the University of California San Francisco Sam Hawgood, the first female Governor-General of Australia Dame Quentin Bryce, President of King's College London Ed Byrne, member of United Kingdom's Prime Minister Council for Science and Technology Max Lu, Oscar and Emmy awards winner Geoffrey Rush, triple Grammy Award winner Tim Munro, former Chief Justices of Australia, and the former CEO and Chairman of Dow Chemical and current Director of DowDuPont Andrew N. Liveris. 